# Penn Biotech Group meeting notes

## 7 Feb 2024

Points of discussion
  * Promotion + Recruiting -- 82 responses thus far, most of whom not on PBG
    case already. 
  * Application review will be minimal. Require Penn email + grad student
  * PBG membership is required, but will be lenient with lecture attendance
  * No lecture participation required, but will help with competition
  * David getting responses from potential sponsors. 
  * Ramp up sponsorship requests next week.
    * Want more notes on sponsors.
    * Do not ask speakers to sponsor.
  * Meeting with Matt Ostrup tomorrow afternoon.
  * Josh will provide slides. We recommended more case study + day-to-day info.
    * We should have good showing to match his energy.
    * Will need A/V in room . Steven will arrive early to help set up.
    * All students have access to Skirkanich
  * Matt Ostrup will Zoom in.
    * Discuss case prompts beforehand.
  * Eric prefers to do mini-lecture. Traveling on 21st. Best week is March 14,
    but we'd have to switch our order. Eric can do VC case study. Worst case,
    he can serve on panel. We prefer him to discuss market sizing.
  * Waiting to hear back from Josh Kennedy-Smith
  * Week 5 could be Arun Das
  * Mengdi may have connection for week 8/9
  * Handle judge selection later 

Action items
  * [Steven] Communicate via CampusGroups that participation in competition
    isn't needed
  * [David] Review application on Sunday 11th
  * [David] Send welcome packet (syllabus, letter, schedule, Slack) by end of
    day Monday 12th
    * Fix wording + dates/times on letter, add table in Thursday 8th meeting
    * [Nektaria] Spruce up letter
  * [David] Send syllabus to Gabrielle for review
    * [David] Edit syllabus with disclaimer that order may change
  * [James] Set up slack channel by Friday/Saturday
    * Can re-use last year's channel, just wipe it first
  * [David] Reorganize sponsor Excel list by next Wednesday
    * Will help team delegate emails to send
  * [Helen] Ask Heather if she wants to present in-person
  * [Steven] Ask room reservation team for help with A/V
  * [Steven] Confirm with Eric on 3/14 this week. CC Gabrielle.


## 8 Feb 2024

Points of discussion
  * Don't set specific number of lectures to attend. Assign priority status
    instead. Use in-person paper sheet + online Zoom attendance list
  * OK to watch and not participate in lectures
  * Slides won't be shared
  * Leave asset as "early-stage"

Action items
  * [Nektaria] Graphic design. Send welcome packet my midday Monday
  * Collect notes and materials for lectures. Send materials on Tuesday prior to
    lecture. Finalize by 1 week prior to that Tuesday.
    * [Yuwan] Week 5 lecture -- Market sizing and TAM
    * [Helen] Week 6 lecture -- Development and Regulation
    * [David] Week 7 lecture -- Commercialization
    * [James] Week 8 lecture -- Financial valuation

## 14 Feb 2024

Points of discussion
  * 108 participants (see roster on Drive)
  * Want week 4-6 speaker confirmations by end of Feb
  * Keep Zoom link the same week-to-week. Can make co-hosts prior to call
    * Not planned to record meeting
  * New Deck for E-Board after lecture
  * Week 2-3 speakers look good. Steinman (Wk. 2) will be in-person
  * Foresite not interested in sponsorship, though could serve on panel
  * Stay on E-Board Slack channel rather than new Slack
  * Wait to reach out to potential judges. Set location first

Action items
  * [Gabrielle] Follow up on B-Labs reservation
  * [Steven] Receive slides from Josh before his talk
  * [David] Bring flash drives/connectors to project slides
  * [David] Reach out to Commodore again for Week 5. Could reach out to Point72
  * [David+Gabrielle] Meet with 3rd Rock Wed Feb 21 at 1:30PM via Zoom
  * [David] Reorganize sponsor information

## 22 Feb 2024

Points of discussion
  * Weeks 4 and 6 confirmed. Week 5 up in the air
  * Gabrielle followed up with BLabs space, but too expensive
  * Documents have been copied over to Drive
  * Commodore unavailable
  * Arun Das or Alexander Wilson may be available for Week 8
  * Harim Won could work for Week 5
  * Next round of speakers announced before 3/10, likely 3/8

Action items
  * Think about showcase next week. Finalize during Spring Break
  * Meet with syllabus team to discuss supplemental info
  * [David] Delegate emails and develop template during today's lecture
  * [David] Reach out on Tuesday to Jim Lebenthal for potential Week 5
  * [Gabrielle] Reach out to Arun Das via Wharton email for potential Week 5/8


## 28 Feb 2024

Points of discussion
  * Jim Lebenthal (asset allocation expert) is booked for Week 5, virtual
  * Advertise Slack alongside Google form for showcase
  * Week 7 still aiming for Josh at RTW
  * Panels for weeks 8 and 9
  * Matt Ostrup will be in-person, arriving 4:30pm at 30th St. David will meet
    him there.

Action items
  * Send Jim Lebenthal info to Nektaria for flyer
  * [James] Google form for showcase by next week
    * Ask for participant opt-in, and see what people are interested to do
  * [David] Reschedule meeting with Third Rock
  * [David] Assign emails

## 6 March 2024

Points of discussion
  * Nektaria has done flyers. Will ship Monday with newsletter
  * Showcase communications will be to participants only
  * Virtual only for weeks 4-6
  * Josh Kennedy-Smith is likely available for Week 7. Chase at Foresite
    potentially for Week 9
  * Not seeking showcase-specific sponsor

Action items
  * [All] Check Excel spreadsheet to send emails for sponsorship
    * Start sending Monday
    * Be sure to CC another member on each email

## 13 March 2024

Points of discussion
  * 3rd Rock is interested in sponsoring, potentially adding Judge or Wk 9 Panel
    speaker + Silver sponsorship
  * Hoping for 6-person teams, 40 ppl overall for showcase. 1 hr presentations

Action items
  * [Syllabus team] Meet Th. before talk
  * Announce showcase signup form in Slack + at lecture Th. night
  * [Gabrielle] Reach out to Arun Das and Josie for Week 8 panel 
  * Add slide for tomorrow's lecture to explain asset valuation showcase
  * [Gabrielle] Ask Steven to send reminder email for Th lecture

## 14 March 2024

Points of discussion
  * Yuwan reviewed market sizing process for HW1
  * Team formation before choosing assets. 6 teams, 5-8 members each
  * Edited Google Form for asset valuation participation

Action items
  * Create Google Form for HW1, due 3/28 6PM

## 20 March 2024

Points of discussion
  * 30 responses: 2 no, 1 remote from SF
  * 5 teams of 6 works best
  * Could skip Arun (not relevant for week 8, but could do week 7)

Action items
  * [David] Send Gabrielle email regarding Arun tonight
  * [James] Match applicants into teams. 
    * Send emails to each team. Ask to respond by Monday with contact person for
      each team. 
    * Send draft email to Gabrielle tmrw.

## 28 March 2024

Points of discussion
  * Reviewed Regulation assignment
    * Ask for 2 drug reports
  * Could do in-house lecture for Week 7
  * Everyone should participate in asset valuation presentation. 8 min / talk
  * We can offer $1k total -- $500-300-200 prizes
    * Need to interact with WGA for reimbursements
  * Week 10 B+Labs Th. 4/25 6-8PM confirmed

Action items
  * [James] Create Slack channels for each team
  * [James] Send assignment to all participants
  * [David?] Prepare asset valuation rubric
  * [Steven] Ask Poisel, Heather, Josh, Samut for judges. Prioritize in-person.
  * [Gabrielle] Advertise showcase to all PBG
  * [David] Create Week 7 lesson. Follow up on Saturday
  * [David] Reach out to Week 8/9 panel speakers (remote)

## 4 April 2024

Points of discussion
  * Have secured judges + 3 Week 9 panel speakers
  * Would like 3rd speaker for Week 8
  * Josh and Heather can do in-person for judging. No reply from Arun
  * Mengdi's team hasn't submitted Week 1 assignment

Action items
  * Move Week 8 lecture to 8PM to accomodate Josh
  * [Gabrielle] Message Mosha to ask for contact info on Week 8
  * [Steven] Compile questions for 1st 30 min of Week 9 panel
  * [David] Ask Nektaria for new advertisements
  * [Helen] Reach out to Mike Poisel from PCI for judging
  * [David] Reach out to Matt Burkhardt for judging
  * [David] Create rough rubric for final presentation
  * [Gabrielle] Send sign-up form on 15th to IR, open to rest of PBG on 18th

## 10 April 2024

Points of discussion
  * Good for Weeks 8, 9, showcase
  * Poisel unavailable, but PCI assoc. director Yi-Yen Chen can step in.
  * We've got enough judges as-is, no need for extras
  * Questions for 1st 30 min of Apr 18 lecture look good. Can cut some
  * Should create winner certificates for showcase

Action items
  * [James] Finish and upload Week 8 supplemental material
  * [James] Check on teams 4 and 5 for intra-team comms
  * [Gabrielle] Send showcase signup next week
  * [Gabrielle] Discuss judge gifts with Trevor + Mosha
  * [Steven] Upload Week 9 questions onto Drive
  * [All] Meet 15 min before tomorrow's 8PM lecture

## 11 April 2024

Points of discussion
  * Assignment looks good, just trim some questions from part A
  * Final presentations are 8 minutes w Q+A of 2 min

Action items
  * [James] Send out email at 9PM with assignment and presentation guide

